# Solving Problems & Debugging

### The Challenge
* You have been asked to write apiece of software
  * You have been given specifications

* You are not sure where to start 
  * Perhaps you don't understand the underlying tech
  * Prehaps you don't understand all the specifications
  * Perhaps you are not sure how the different components work together

### Advice to Follow
* THe following advice applies to every single software project that you will encounter in life!!
* And certainly much more than software [Warning: philosophy]

### Making a Large Problem Seem Easy
* Divide and conquer
* Break the problem into smaller and smaller pieces - ask yourself about each piece:
  * Do I already know how to do this?
  * If not, does this seem easy?

### Example: Program 1
* Identify the core task
  * Compute statistics
  * Ignore the rest (handling signals, etc.)

* Break the core task into pieces
  * Need to compute statistics on rows AND on columns

* Focus on one of the sub-pieces
  * How do we compute stats for just rows?

### Example: Program 1
* Still not sure what to do, so let's break it down further
  * Try and compute stats for one single row, not all rows
* Computing stats for one row can be broken down into:
  1. We need to read one line from a file
  2. Then we need to sume the numbers in the line
  3. Then we need to divide by the number of numbers on the line
  4. Then we need to print out the result

* Each of these look doable

### Searching with a Mission - Step 1
* How do we read one line from a file?
* Let's read thru all of the sources available to you, this time looking for a specific solution to reading a single line
* Re-read technical reference documentation once you have a compact problem
  * You'll find that you'll pay closer attention
  * You'll remember more of what you read
  * You'll find the answers to your problem
  * Before, you didn't have a goal, so your brain didn't bother to internalize or remember the info

### Common UNIX Commands - Reading Data
* read - Get data from either stdin or a file (wiht -u option)
``` bash
$ cat readtest
#!/bin/bash
echo "Enter in a string, then  hit enter: "
read myvar
echo "You entered: $myvar"
echo $myvar > "tempfilename$$"
echo $myvar >> "tempfilename$$"
echo $myvar >> "tempfilename$$"
echo "The temp file contects are:"
cat "tempfilename$$"
echo "The first line of the file is:"
read entireline < "tempfilename$$"
echo "$entireline"
read firstword restofline < "tempfilename$$"
echo "First word of first line: \"$firstword\""
echo "Rest of line: \"$restofline\""
rm -f "tempfilename$$"

$ readtest
Enter in a string, then hit enter:
THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
You entered: THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
The temp file contents are:
THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
The first line of the file is:
THIS SENTENCE IS FALSE
First work of first line: "THIS"
Rest of line: "SENTENCE IS FALSE"
```

### Learning to Read - Step 1
* You figured out how to read a single line from stdin into a variable:
  * read singlelinevar

``` bash
$ cat readtest
#!/bin/bash
read singlelinevar
echo $singlelinevar
$ cat data
6 4 4 7 7
$ cat data | readtest
6 4 4 7 7 
```

### Summing up - Step 2
* Next step: sum the numbers on a line
* Decompose further:
  * Forget the line, how do I add two numbers
  * Then worry about getting those numbers from the line

* You read the docs (finding it faster this time!), and figure out how to add two numbers and store them in a variable
  * sum=\`expr 3 + 4\`
  * sum=\`expr $var1 + $var2\`

### Lotsa Summing - Step 2
* Now, how to take those numbers from the line you read?
* And - a new challenge: what if you don't know how many numbers are on a line?
  * read X read the entire line into a variable - how do you break it up?
* Raw documentation might not be as useful as putting the question up on a discussion board, asking a friend, or searching online

### Loop it - Step 2
* Let's loop it - we've learned about the bask for loop:

``` bash 
$ cat data
6 4 4 7 7 
$ cat
#!/bin/bash
read myLine
sum=0
for i in $myLine 
do
	sum=`expr $sum + $i`
done
echo "sum is: $sum"
$cat data | readlooptest
-bash: ./readlooptest: Permission denied
$ chmod +x readlooptest
$ cat data | readlooptest
sum is: 28
```

### Dividing and Printing - Step 3 & 4
* Next step: divide by the number of numbers on the line
* Decompose further:
  * How can we tell how many numbers are on a line?
  * How do we divide two numbers?
* We can simply add a count variable to our previous code, and use the division operator instead of addition
* Then use printf to combine it all!

``` bash 
$ cat data
6 4 4 7 7
$ cat countdividelooptest
#!/bin/bash
read myLine
sum=0
count=0 
for i in $myLine
do 
	sum=`expr $sum + $i`
	count=`expr $count + 1`
done
mean=`expr $sum / $count`
echo "$count entries sums to: $sum"
echo "mean average is: $mean"
$ cat data | countdividelooptest
5 entries sums up to: 28
mean average is: 5
```

